The Rollin 60s Neighborhood Crips is a "set" of the Crips street gang alliance based in Los Angeles, California, originally formed around Hyde Park, Los Angeles, in 1976 from the Westside Crips and having since spread to other cities in the United States. Membership is estimated to be around 1,600 people, making it one of the largest gangs in the Los Angeles area.
Members identify themselves by wearing the Seattle Mariners or Chicago White Sox logos and mark areas they are in with graffiti.

History
Two men identified as members of the Rollin' 60s were arrested for the 1984 murders of four members of professional football player Kermit Alexander's family. Police say the gang members got the address wrong and killed the wrong family.
In 1988, a member of the Rollin' 60s was responsible for the death of Karen Toshima, who got caught in the crossfire between two gang members.

In 1992, Crips' Kingpin Keith "Stone" Thomas was killed. Around 400 people, including law enforcement, attended his funeral which prompted many to reflect on the bloodshed and actions of Rollin' 60s. Youth worker and activist Chilton Alphonse reflected on the change marked by Stone's death:Once upon a time, the Rollin' 60s were a family. Now, I think a lot of these youngsters are beginning to question, is it really worth it.According to a news outlet in 2004, Rollin' 60s was "the largest black criminal street gang in the City of Los Angeles".

Notable members
Musician, businessman, and community activist Nipsey Hussle was a member of the Rollin' 60s Neighborhood Crips.
Georgia rapper Quando Rondo is also a member of the Savannah branch of the Rollin' 60s Neighborhood Crips and in June 2023 was arrested for having an alleged leadership role in the gang.
Music executive Eugene "Big U" Henley Jr. and father of Chargers linebacker Daiyan Henley was arrested in December 1991. He was a member before he was caught in a drug sting and sentenced to 23 years in prison. Although he has never admitted to affiliation, "he was described by gang experts as a leader, if not the top man, of the Rollin' 60s," and he has been interviewed about the history of the Rollin' 60s Neighborhood Crips. He founded the non-profit Developing Options Inc. after being released in 2004. Henley was once again arrested in March 2025 amid allegations he ran a "'mafia-like' racket" as a member of the Rollin' 60s.
Keita Roc has a "Rollin' 60s" tattoo and spoke at Stone's funeral.

References

--- INFOBOX ---

Rollin 60s Neighborhood Crips
Founded: 1976
Founding location: Los Angeles , California
Years active: 1976–present
Ethnicity: Predominantly African-American
Membership (est.): 1, 600
Criminal activities: Racketeering, murder, drug trafficking, arms trafficking, auto theft, armed robbery, burglary, extortion, fraud
Allies: Rollin 40's and Rollin 90's NHCs
Rivals: Bloods , "Hoover factions", "Eight Trey Gangster Crip (83GC)"